---
title: "D vs C++"
date: 2020-09-23 10:57
categories: misc, programming
---

## What's wrong with C++?
---

I've been writing C++ code for the last 15 years of my life. I figured it was time to see what was out there and try a new langauge. As you spend a lot of time with any language you'll find things that irk, or annoy you about it, and I have my fair share of grievances with C++ at this stage.

My main issues with C++:
- Extremely slow to build
- Very easy to shoot yourself in the foot performance-wise (hard to track copy operations)
- No standardised build/package management system
- Takes so long to build (I'm impatient)
- Very very very verbose, and often painful to look at (angle brackets and double colons everywhere)
- Template metaprogramming is a lot of effort for very little win (and often contributes to slow compile times)

Now, I should say that some people are able to do very impressive things with C++'s metaprogramming ([Enoki](https://github.com/mitsuba-renderer/enoki) is quite cool), but I'd say it's impressive in spite of the C++'s metaprogramming capabilities. They would be able to accomplish this much more quickly in D, and in a way that's still readable and maintainable. 

## Why not Rust?
---
Can't talk about modern alternatives to C++ without mentioning Rust. It seems very interesting in its own right, and I'm a fan of some of the design decisions: algebraic types are cool; borrow checker sounds good (if a bit annoying); immutable by default is awesome. I'm seeing that it's still as slow to build as C++ code, so that kinda kills my interest. I will probably come back to it at some point.

## What's cool about D?
---
D (sometimes called [Dlang](https://dlang.org)), is a language invented by Walter Bright (wrote the first commercial C++ compiler), and Andrei Alexandrescu (head of template programming basically), and it's intended to be an evolution/successor to C. It mixes in higher level language functionality and expressivity, with the power to go to the bare metal.

It's hard to point to a single feature of D to say why I prefer it to C/C++, 
### Ecosystem/Tools:
- BUILDS SO FAST
- C is a proper subset of D, all C code and libraries are source compatible
- Has a standarised package management / build system called [dub](https://github.com/dlang/dub)
- Has a built-in documentation syntax and tools to generate documentation pages from your code
- Unit testing is built into the language and tools
- The runtime has a standardised thread pool, so no more BYO threadpool for every 3rd party library/code that's running
- Generate fast code with ldc2 (uses llvm for codegen)
- GCC 9 has support for D!
- Cross-platform (Windows/Linux/MacOS)

### Language:
- Extremely powerful, readable, metaprogramming with human readable errors
- Built-in slice data type. This sounds like a small thing but really makes coding *much more enjoyable*
- The standard library is based on ranges, not iterators
- Supports mixins, which allow you to do more while writing less
- [Unified Function Call Syntax](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Uniform_Function_Call_Syntax) means there's no difference between a function and a method. Another thing that just *makes me feel happier*
- Supports inline assembly (unlike 64-bit MSVC), for all the weird stuff you need to do

### Doesn't it have garbage collection?
The rumours are true, but this is barely a problem in practice. You have access to the libc malloc/free routines, which aren't tracked by the GC, so you can manage the memory yourself (I'll post my findings on this), or just disable the GC via `GC.disable;`.

I've also seen enough C++ code that's proliferated with shared pointers to the point where they would actually benefit from a garbage collector.

### Show me some code!
Most certainly

---
## Examples


### N-dimensional vector in C++
Since my work is in computer graphics, lets create every CG programmer's favourite data type, a 3 dimensional vector in C++ and then compare with D:
```c++
// C++

struct Vec3f
{
    float x, y, z;
};
```

Since we do a lot of algebra with the vec3f, it's convenient to overload common math operators like `+`, `*`, `-`, `/`, etc... it would look something like this:
```c++
// C++

struct Vec3f
{
    float x, y, z;

    /// constructor omitted

    inline Vec3f operator+( const Vec3f& v ) const
    {
        return Vec3f( x+v.x, y+v.y, z+v.z );
    }

    /// I know you can't multiply two vectors, but a component-wise product is handy
    inline Vec3f operator*( const Vec3f& v ) const
    {
        return Vec3f( x*v.x, y*v.y, z*v.z );
    }

    inline Vec3f operator-( const Vec3f& v ) const
    {
        return Vec3f( x-v.x, y-v.z, z-v.z );
    }

    inline Vec3f operator/( const Vec3f& v ) const
    {
        return Vec3f( x/v.x, y/v.y, z/v.z );
    }
};
```

You need to add in all of those little operator overloads, that's not even including operators like `+=`, `-=`, `*=`, `/=`. which need their own implementations as well.

That's a lot of code to have to write, and this is only for Vec3f! It isn't uncommon to have another bunch of this boilerplate for a 2D, or 4D vector (`Vec2f`, `Vec4f`). More typing also means more room for errors, did you notice the typo in the code?

---
### N-dimensional vector in D

```d
// D

struct Vec3f
{
    float x, y, z;

    /// initialiser omitted

    /// all binary operations with this type go through this function
    pure const Vec3f opBinary( string op )( in Vec3f rhs )
    {
        return mixin( "Vec3f( x "~op~" rhs.x, y "~op~" rhs.y, z "~op~" rhs.z );" );
    }
}
```

Wait, that's all? That opBinary is actually called for *any* binary operation made on Vec3f types. The function itself is templated (notice the two sets of parantheses), the `string op` being the template parameter. So the operation `a + b`, where `a`, and `b` are `Vec3f`, translates into `a.opBinary!("+")( b );` The `!` is required before setting a template parameter in D (no angle brackets here).

The `~` is doing string concatenation here (`~` is for concatenation of any kind), so we get this line in the function `return mixin( "Vec3f( x + rhs.x, y + rhs.y, z + rhs.z);" );`. The `mixin` takes the input string and literally inserts it as code at compile time. It's very powerful.

Let's generalise the above to 2D and 4D vectors, to really drive home the savings:

```d
// D

struct Vec( int Dims )  /// This is now a templated struct, parameterised by an int `Dims`
{
    float x, y;
    static if ( Dims >= 3 ) { float z; }  /// static if gets evaluated at compile time
    static if ( Dims >= 4 ) { float w; } 

    /// initialiser omitted

    pure const Vec!Dims opBinary( string op )( in Vec!Dims rhs )
    {
        static if ( Dims == 2 )
            return mixin( "Vec!Dims( x"~op~"rhs.x, y"~op~"rhs.y);"); 
        else static if ( Dims == 3 )
            return mixin( "Vec!Dims( x "~op~" rhs.x, y "~op~" rhs.y, z "~op~" rhs.z );" );
        else static if ( Dims == 4 )
            return mixin( "Vec!Dims( x "~op~" rhs.x, y "~op~" rhs.y, z "~op~" rhs.z, w "~op~"rhs.w );" );
        else 
            static assert( "incorrect number of dimensions" );
    }
}

/// Alias is like typedef
alias Vec!2 Vec2f;
alias Vec!3 Vec3f;
alias Vec!4 Vec4f;
```

Boom! We now have 2D, 3D, and 4D vectors that you can `+ - * /` together. `static if` works at compile time and will make sure the appropriate code is injected depending on the dimension of the vector you're after. Anything that doesn't pass the `static if` test doesn't get compiled. I believe C++20 finally has an analog to this, `constexpr if`, which I haven't actually tried out myself.

### Serialising/Deserialising
---

Imagine you want to be be able to serialise/deserialise any of your structs/classes to/from JSON. In C++ you would either need to write a function, or bit of code, to make sure ever field can turn into JSON, and vice versa. You can also use macros to do all sorts of demonic things (I don't hate macros), and have to mark up all your fields in structs/classes or something. This approach still relies on someone making sure they've hooked everything up correctly, so it's prone to human error.

D to the rescue! D allows you to iterate over any fields/methods that a struct/class may have, and interrogate all sorts of information about it, at compile time. This is extremely powerful and I'm sure you can think of a dozen ways to use it.  I would put code examples up, but the margin of this blog is too small to contain them. 

I found this [other blog series](https://bradley.chatha.dev/BlogPost/JsonSerialiser/0-serialise-basic-d-types-dlang-tutorial-metaprogramming) that goes into this problem in depth, and gives a great view of the things you can do with metaprogramming in D.

## Summary
--- 

I'd highly recommend trying out D! If you've been doing C++ for a while and you just *accidentally changed whitespace in a critical header* and want to cry deeply, you could probably get Dlang running by the time you've built your program. 

Recommendations:
- Install [ldc2](https://github.com/ldc-developers/ldc/tags)
- Learn how to use [dub](https://dub.pm/getting_started)
- If you use Visual Studio (I don't), download the Visual D plugin
- That's it, you don't need anything else. Go build stuff!
- Perseverence. It may seem simple but it's a deep language with a rich feature set, take your time to soak it in